Issues/gvk60 Serializer API rework, example code cleanup and documentation (#91)
cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk: docs/serializer.md

`gvk::serializer::deserialize` object, where both take a path to a **cache** file.
`gvk::serializer::serialize` creates and writes to the **cache** file and
`gvk::serializer::deserialize` reads from the **cache** file at the given path. A helper function
`gvk::does_cache_file_exist(const std::string_view)` can be used to determine which initialization
method shall be used.
```
const std::string cacheFilePath(pathToOrcaScene + ".cache");

auto serializer = gvk::does_cache_file_exist(cacheFilePath) ?
	gvk::serializer(gvk::serializer::deserialize(cacheFilePath)) :
	gvk::serializer(gvk::serializer::serialize(cacheFilePath));
```
After initialization the current **mode** of the serializer can be retrived by calling `mode()` on
the serializer, which either returns **serializer::mode::serialize** or
**serializer::mode::deserialize**. To serialize or deserialize a type, the `archive(Type&&)`
function template is called on the serializer object. This function serializes the given object to
the **cache** file if the mode of the serialize is **serialize** or deserializes the object from the
**cache** file into the given object if the mode is **deserialize**. The following code shows how a

> typical serializer usage can look like when used during orca scene loading.

Reviewer: There should be a more detailed explaination about what exactly we are serializing: I.e. a `std::vector<vec3>` and then a `size_t`. 

And a question arises: Why serialize the vector first, and then the size? 
Or actually: Why do we need to serialize both? Is `positions.size()` not enough? Do we really need to serialize `numPositions` in addition?

```
std::vector<glm::vec3> positions;
if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	get_positions(orca_scene, positions);
}
serializer.archive(positions);

size_t numPositions = (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) ? positions.size() : 0;
serializer.archive(numPositions);
```

> The serializer features spezialised functions for serializing and deserializing a block of memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The serializer features specialised functions for serializing and deserializing blocks of memory
```

and host visible buffers. Both can be used separately but are especially usefull when used in

> conjunction to, i.e. serialize/deserialize image data. Image data loaded from a file can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conjunction to, e.g., serialize/deserialize image data. Image data loaded from a file can be
```

> serialized using `archive_memory`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
serialized using `gvk::archive_memory`:
```
We should include the namespace to avoid being ambiguous. (Also in other places wherever it applies.)

```
size_t imageSize;
// Load image frome file
void* pixels = load_image(pathToImage, &imageSize);

serializer.archive_memory(pixels, imageSize);
```

> before it is copied into a host visible GPU buffer. In further program runs, i.e. when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Serialization happens before the memory is copied into a host visible buffer. In further program runs, i.e. when
```

deserializing, the serializer can copy the image data directly from the cached file into a host

> visible GPU buffer using `archive_buffer`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visible buffer using `gvk::archive_buffer`:
```

```
// Create host visible staging buffer for filling on host side
auto sb = avk::create_buffer(
	AVK_STAGING_BUFFER_MEMORY_USAGE,
	vk::BufferUsageFlagBits::eTransferSrc,
	avk::generic_buffer_meta::create_from_size(imageSize)
);

aSerializer.archive_buffer(sb);
```

> which avoids an extra memory allocation in main memory for the image data before the copy into a host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`gvk::archive_buffer` avoids extra memory allocation in main memory for the image data but copies directly into a host
```

visible GPU buffer.

## \*\_cached functions

> Gears-Vk features \*\_cached function variants of various helper functions for orca scene loading to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Gears-Vk_ features `*_cached* variants of various helper functions for ORCA scene loading to
```

serializer. For example, to retrieve a 2D texture coordinates buffer for model data
(**modelAndMeshes**), one can use
```
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached(
	serializer, modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```
instead of the longer version
```
avk::buffer texCoordsBuffer;
if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer(
		modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
	);
}
serializer.archive_buffer(texCoordsBuffer);
```
The \*\_cached functions internaly take case of either serializing or deserialising the necessary
data (in above example the content of the returned buffer, i.e. the 2D texture coordinates).
For further \*\_cached function usage see `void load_orca_scene_cached(...)` in the **orca_loader** example at [`orca_loader.cpp#L187`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/examples/orca_loader/source/orca_loader.cpp#L187)

## Custom type serialization
Every type needs a special template function which defines how a type is serialized. Often used
types such as `glm::vec3`, `glm::mat4`, etc. and various `std` types this special function is

> already defined in **serializer.hpp**. To add serialization ability to a custom type, a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already defined in `serializer.hpp`. To add serialization ability to a custom type, a
```
Please add `serializer.hpp`  as a link to the file!

> **serialize** function template in the same namespace as the custom type must be created. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`serialize` function template in the same namespace as the custom type must be created. The
```

Reviewer: Use source code formatting whenever something is source code (generally)!

	serializer.archive_memory(pixels, imageSize);
}
serializer.archive(imageSize);

// Create host visible staging buffer
auto sb = avk::create_buffer(
	AVK_STAGING_BUFFER_MEMORY_USAGE,
	vk::BufferUsageFlagBits::eTransferSrc,
	avk::generic_buffer_meta::create_from_size(imageSize)
);

if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	sb->fill(pixels, 0, avk::sync::not_required());
}
else {
	serializer.archive_buffer(sb);
}
```
When serializing, image data is loaded with some image loading function, represented by the generic `load_image` in the code, which returns a pointer to the data and the imageSize. `serializer.archive_memory` is then used to serialize the image data to the **cache** file and `serializer.archive` is used to either serialize or deserialize the size of the image. After creating a host visible staging buffer with the size of the image, the buffer is either filled by it's own `sb->fill` function or directly from the **cache** file using `gvk::serializer::archive_buffer`, which avoids an extra memory allocation in main memory for the image data but copies directly into a host visible GPU buffer.

## \*\_cached functions

> _Gears-Vk_ features *_cached* function variants of various helper functions for ORCA scene loading to ease serializer usage and avoid constant writing of different code paths for both modes of the serializer. For example, to retrieve a 2D texture coordinates buffer for model data (modelAndMeshes), one can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Gears-Vk_ features `*_cached` function variants for various work loads that support serialization/deserialization. They are intended to simplify serializer usage and avoid the need of implementing different code paths for both modes of the serializer. For example, to retrieve 2D texture coordinates buffer for model data (modelAndMeshes), `gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached` can be used:
```

```
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached(
	serializer, modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```

> instead of the longer version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The equivalent functionality without usage of a `*_cached` function variant would be like follows in this case:
```

```
avk::buffer texCoordsBuffer;
if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer(
		modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
	);
}
serializer.archive_buffer(texCoordsBuffer);
```

> The \*\_cached functions internaly take case of either serializing or deserialising the necessary data (in above example the content of the returned buffer, i.e. the 2D texture coordinates). All \*\_cached functions are designed to be easily integrated into existing, non-serialized code paths. The following code shows a non-serialized way of loading a ORCA scene using helper functions of _Gears-Vk_ and creating buffers for positions, indices and texture coordinates. The code omits iterating through all materials and just creates buffers for the first mesh of one material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `*_cached` functions internally either serialize or deserialize the necessary data (in the above example, that would be the content of the returned buffer, i.e. the 2D texture coordinates). All `*_cached` functions are designed to integrate well into existing, non-serialized code paths. The following code shows a non-serialized way of loading an ORCA scene and creating buffers for positions, indices and texture coordinates. The code omits iterating through all materials and just creates buffers for the first mesh of one material.
```

```
// Load an ORCA scene from file
auto orca = gvk::orca_scene_t::load_from_file(aPathToOrcaScene);
// Get all the different materials from the whole scene
auto distinctMaterialsOrca = orca->distinct_material_configs_for_all_models();

// Get mesh indices of the first material
std::vector<gvk::model_and_mesh_indices> meshIndices = distinctMaterialsOrca.begin()->second;
int meshIndicesIndex = 0;

std::vector<std::tuple<avk::resource_reference<const gvk::model_t>, std::vector<size_t>>> modelAndMeshes;
modelAndMeshes = gvk::make_models_and_meshes_selection(orca->model_at_index(meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mModelIndex).mLoadedModel, meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mMeshIndices);

// Get a buffer containing all positions, and one containing all indices for all submeshes with this material
auto [positionsBuffer, indicesBuffer] = gvk::create_vertex_and_index_buffers(
	modelAndMeshes, {}, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);

// Get a buffer containing all texture coordinates for all submeshes with this material
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_flipped_buffer(
	modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```

> Integrating the serializer into above code is easily done by introducing a condition at the beginning, to avoid scene loading from file, and swap some helper functions for their \*\_cached ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrating the serializer into above code is easily done by introducing a condition at the beginning, to avoid scene loading from file, and swap some helper functions for their `*_cached` counterparts:
```

	// Get mesh indices of the first material
	std::vector<gvk::model_and_mesh_indices> meshIndices = distinctMaterialsOrca.begin()->second;
	int meshIndicesIndex = 0;

	std::vector<std::tuple<avk::resource_reference<const gvk::model_t>, std::vector<size_t>>> modelAndMeshes;
	modelAndMeshes = gvk::make_models_and_meshes_selection(
		orca->model_at_index(meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mModelIndex).mLoadedModel, meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mMeshIndices
	);

	modelAndMeshes = gvk::make_models_and_meshes_selection(orca->model_at_index(meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mModelIndex).mLoadedModel, meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mMeshIndices);
}

// Get a buffer containing all positions, and one containing all indices for all submeshes with this material
auto [positionsBuffer, indicesBuffer] = gvk::create_vertex_and_index_buffers_cached(
	serializer, modelAndMeshes, {}, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);

// Get a buffer containing all texture coordinates for all submeshes with this material
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_flipped_buffer_cached(
	serializer, modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```

> For further \*\_cached function usage and a complete ORCA scene loading example see `void load_orca_scene_cached(...)` in the **orca_loader** example at [`orca_loader.cpp#L187`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/examples/orca_loader/source/orca_loader.cpp#L187)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further `*_cached` function usage see `void load_orca_scene_cached(...)` in the **orca_loader** example at [`orca_loader.cpp#L187`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/examples/orca_loader/source/orca_loader.cpp#L187)
```

> #### Available \*\_cached variants of scene and model loading functions to ease serializer usage and simplify code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Available \*\_cached variants of scene and model loading functions
```

* `create_bone_weights_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_bone_indices_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_bone_indices_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_bone_indices_for_single_target_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_bone_indices_for_single_target_buffer_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_bone_indices_for_single_target_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_bone_indices_for_single_target_buffer_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_2d_texture_coordinates_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_2d_texture_coordinates_flipped_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_2d_texture_coordinates_flipped_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `get_3d_texture_coordinates_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `create_3d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`
* `convert_for_gpu_usage_cached(gvk::serializer& aSerializer, ...)`

## Custom type serialization

> Every type needs a special template function which defines how a type is serialized. For often used types such as `glm::vec3`, `glm::mat4`, etc. and various `std` types this special functions are already defined in [`serializer.hpp`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/framework/include/serializer.hpp). To add serialization ability to a custom type, a **serialize** function template in the same namespace as the custom type must be created. The function template takes two arguments, an **Archive** and your custom **Type** as reference, and passes every member of the **Type** to the **Archive**. If one of the members is also a custom type, a separate `serialize` function template must be created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To serialize a custom type, the custom type is required to have a specialized overload to the `gvk::serialize` template function which defines how a type is serialized. For commonly used types such as `glm::vec3`, `glm::mat4`, etc. and various types in the `std` namespace such `gvk::serialize` are already defined in [`serializer.hpp`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/framework/include/serializer.hpp). 

To add serialization ability to a custom type, a `gvk::serialize` function template overload in the same namespace as the custom type must be created. The function template takes two arguments, an `Archive` and the custom type's type `Type`. Both parameters must be passed by reference. If one of the members is yet another custom type, a separate `gvk::serialize` function template overload must be created.
```

Please double check if what I changed makes sense! (Not 100% sure about that. --> Especially my changes to `gvk::serialize` might be wrong. Because you indicated that the namespaces must match the custom type exactly. Sorry if I made some things more confusing! Feel free to re-write according to your judgement.) Please try to get the information given on point---as precisely as possible!

```
nampespace SOME_NAMESPACE {
	struct SOME_TYPE {
		member1;
		member2;
		...
	};

	template<typename Archive>
	void serialize(Archive& aArchive, SOME_TYPE& aValue)
	{
		aArchive(aValue.member1, aValue.member2, ...);
	}
}
```

> If the custom type is a class with private members that must be serialized, the **serialize** template function has to be either declared inside the custom type or defined as a friend when declared extern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the custom type is a class with private members that must be serialized, the `serialize` template function has to be either declared inside the custom type or defined as a friend when declared `extern`:
```

```
class SOME_TYPE {
	template<typename Archive>
	friend void serialize(Archive& aArchive, SOME_TYPE& aValue);
}
```

> For custom serialization function examples see **serializer** at [`serializer.hpp#L259`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/framework/include/serializer.hpp#L259)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For custom serialization function examples see [`serializer.hpp#L259`](https://github.com/cg-tuwien/Gears-Vk/blob/master/framework/include/serializer.hpp#L259) and following.
```

```
size_t imageSize;
void* pixels;
if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	// Load image frome file using stb image lib
	int channelsInFile = 0;
	int width = 0;
	int height = 0;
	int desiredColorChannels = STBI_rgb_alpha;
	pixels = stbi_load(pathToImage.c_str(), &width, &height, &channelsInFile, desiredColorChannels);
	imageSize = static_cast<size_t>(width) * static_cast<size_t>(height) * static_cast<size_t>(desiredColorChannels);

	serializer.archive_memory(pixels, imageSize);
}
serializer.archive(imageSize);

// Create host visible staging buffer
auto sb = avk::create_buffer(
	AVK_STAGING_BUFFER_MEMORY_USAGE,
	vk::BufferUsageFlagBits::eTransferSrc,
	avk::generic_buffer_meta::create_from_size(imageSize)
);

if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	sb->fill(pixels, 0, avk::sync::not_required());
}
else {
	serializer.archive_buffer(sb);
}
```

> When serializing, image data needs to be loaded with some user provided image loading function, `stbi_load` in the example code above, which returns a pointer to the data and the values to calculate the total image size. `serializer.archive_memory` is then used to serialize the image data to the cache file and `serializer.archive` is used to either serialize or deserialize the size of the image. After creating a host visible staging buffer with the size of the image, the buffer is either filled by it's own `sb->fill` function or directly from the cache file using `gvk::serializer::archive_buffer`, which avoids an extra memory allocation in main memory for the image data but copies directly into a host visible GPU buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example code above image data is loaded from file via `stbi_load`, but only when the serializer's mode is `gvk::serializer::mode::serialize`. It returns a pointer to the data and the values to calculate the total image size. `serializer.archive_memory` is then used to serialize the image data to the cache file and `serializer.archive` is used to either serialize or deserialize the size of the image. After creating a host visible staging buffer with the size of the image, the buffer is either filled by its own `avk::buffer_t::fill` function or directly from the cache file using `gvk::serializer::archive_buffer`, which avoids an extra memory allocation in main memory for the image data and copies directly into a host visible GPU buffer.
```

## \*\_cached functions
_Gears-Vk_ features `*_cached` function variants for various work loads that support serialization/deserialization. They are intended to simplify serializer usage and avoid the need of implementing different code paths for both modes of the serializer. For example, to retrieve 2D texture coordinates buffer for model data (modelAndMeshes), `gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached` can be used:
```
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer_cached(
	serializer, modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```
The equivalent functionality without usage of a `*_cached` function variant would be like follows in this case:
```
avk::buffer texCoordsBuffer;
if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_buffer(
		modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
	);
}
serializer.archive_buffer(texCoordsBuffer);
```

> The `*_cached` functions internally either serialize or deserialize the necessary data (in the above example, that would be the content of the returned buffer, i.e. the 2D texture coordinates). All `*_cached` functions are designed to integrate well into existing, non-serialized code paths. The following code shows a non-serialized way of loading an ORCA scene and creating buffers for positions, indices and texture coordinates. The code omits iterating through all materials and just creates buffers for the first mesh of one material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `*_cached` functions internally either serialize or deserialize the necessary data (in the above example, that would be the content of the returned buffer, i.e. the 2D texture coordinates). All `*_cached` functions are designed to integrate well into existing, non-serialized code paths. The following code shows a non-serialized way of loading an ORCA scene and creating buffers for positions, indices and texture coordinates. The code omits iterating through all materials and just creates buffers for the first mesh that is assigned to the first material returned by `gvk::orca_scene_t::distinct_material_configs_for_all_models`:
```

// Get mesh indices of the first material
std::vector<gvk::model_and_mesh_indices> meshIndices = distinctMaterialsOrca.begin()->second;
int meshIndicesIndex = 0;

std::vector<std::tuple<avk::resource_reference<const gvk::model_t>, std::vector<size_t>>> modelAndMeshes;
modelAndMeshes = gvk::make_models_and_meshes_selection(orca->model_at_index(meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mModelIndex).mLoadedModel, meshIndices[meshIndicesIndex].mMeshIndices);

// Get a buffer containing all positions, and one containing all indices for all submeshes with this material
auto [positionsBuffer, indicesBuffer] = gvk::create_vertex_and_index_buffers(
	modelAndMeshes, {}, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);

// Get a buffer containing all texture coordinates for all submeshes with this material
auto texCoordsBuffer = gvk::create_2d_texture_coordinates_flipped_buffer(
	modelAndMeshes, 0, avk::sync::wait_idle()
);
```
Integrating the serializer into above code is easily done by introducing a condition at the beginning, to avoid scene loading from file, and swap some helper functions for their `*_cached` counterparts:
```
gvk::orca_scene orca;

> std::unordered_map<gvk::material_config, std::vector<gvk::model_and_mesh_indices>> distinctMaterialsOrca;

Reviewer: Das müsste man eigentlich in das `if` hineinverschieben können?!

std::vector<std::tuple<avk::resource_reference<const gvk::model_t>, std::vector<size_t>>> modelAndMeshes;

if (serializer.mode() == gvk::serializer::mode::serialize) {
	// Load an ORCA scene from file
	orca = gvk::orca_scene_t::load_from_file(aPathToOrcaScene);
	// Get all the different materials from the whole scene

> 	distinctMaterialsOrca = orca->distinct_material_configs_for_all_models();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	auto distinctMaterialsOrca = orca->distinct_material_configs_for_all_models();
```

D.h. wenn das oben stimmt, dann einfach hier mit `auto`?!

```
nampespace SOME_NAMESPACE {
	struct SOME_TYPE {
		member1;
		member2;
		...
	};

	template<typename Archive>
	void serialize(Archive& aArchive, SOME_TYPE& aValue)
	{
		aArchive(aValue.member1, aValue.member2, ...);
	}
}
```
If the custom type is a class with private members that must be serialized, the `serialize` template function has to be either declared inside the custom type or defined as a friend when declared `extern`:
```
class SOME_TYPE {
	template<typename Archive>
	friend void serialize(Archive& aArchive, SOME_TYPE& aValue);
}
```
Raw arrays in custom types must be wrapped by a `gvk::serializer::BinaryData` type prior to being passed to the `Archive`. `gkv::serializer` provides a static convenience function for this operation:
```
struct Meshlet {
	unsigned int vertices[64];
	unsigned int indices[126][3];
	unsigned char triangle_count;
	unsigned char vertex_count;
};

template<typename Archive>
void serialize(Archive& aArchive, Meshlet& aValue)
{

> 	aArchive(gvk::serializer::binary_data(aValue.vertices, sizeof(SOME_TYPE::vertices)),
> 			 gvk::serializer::binary_data(aValue.indices, sizeof(SOME_TYPE::indices)),
> 			 aValue.triangle_count,
> 			 aValue.vertex_count);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	aArchive(gvk::serializer::binary_data(aValue.vertices, sizeof(Meshlet::vertices)),
			 gvk::serializer::binary_data(aValue.indices, sizeof(Meshlet::indices)),
			 aValue.triangle_count,
			 aValue.vertex_count);
```
